.TH SAMHAINRC 5 "Jul 29, 2004" "" "samhainrc manual"
.SH NAME
samhainrc \- samhain(8) configuration file

.SH WARNING
.PP
The information in this man page is not always up to date.
The authoritative documentation is the user manual.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The configuration file for 
.BR samhain (8)
is named
.I samhainrc
and located in
.I /etc
by default.
.PP
It contains several sections, indicated by headings in square brackets.
Each section may hold zero or more 
.BI key= value
pairs. Blank lines and lines starting with '#' are comments.
Everything before the first section and after an 
.I "[EOF]" 
is ignored. The file may be (clear text) signed by PGP/GnuPG, and
.B samhain
may invoke GnuPG to check the signature 
if compiled with support for it.
.PP
Conditional inclusion of entries for some host(s) is 
supported via any number of
.BI @ hostname /@ end
directives.
.BI @ hostname
and
.BI @ end
must each be on separate lines. Lines in between will only be
read if 
.I "hostname"
(which may be a regular expression) matches the local host.
.PP
Likewise, conditional inclusion of entries based on system type is
supported via any number of
.BI $ sysname:release:machine /$ end
directives.
.br
.I "sysname:release:machine"
can be inferred from
.I "uname -srm"
and may be a regular expression.
.PP
Filenames/directories to check may be wildcard patterns.
.PP
Options given on the command line will override
those in the configuration file. 
The recognized sections in the configuration file are as follows:
.PP
Boolean options can be set with any of 1|true|yes or 0|false|no.
.TP
.I "[ReadOnly]"
This section may contain
.br 
.BI file= PATH
and
.br
.BI dir= [depth]PATH
entries for files and directories to check. All modifications except access
times will be reported for these files. 
.I [depth] (use without brackets)
is an optional parameter to define a per\-directory recursion
depth.
.TP
.I "[LogFiles]"
As above, but modifications of timestamps, file size, and signature will
be ignored.
.TP
.I "[GrowingLogFiles]"
As above, but modifications of file size will only be ignored if the size has
.IR increased .
.TP
.I "[Attributes]"
As above, but only modifications of ownership and access permissions
will be checked.
.TP
.I "[IgnoreAll]"
As above, but report no modifications for 
these files/directories. Access failures
will still be reported.
.TP
.I "[IgnoreNone]"
As above, but report all modifications for these files/directories,
including access time.
.TP
.I "[User0]"
.TP
.I "[User1]"
.TP
.I "[User2]"
.TP
.I "[User3]"
.TP
.I "[User4]"
These are reserved for user-defined policies.
.TP
.I "[Prelink]"
For prelinked executables / libraries or directories holding them.
.TP
.I "[Log]"
This section defines the filtering rules for logging. 
It may contain the following entries:
.br
.BI  MailSeverity= val
where the threshold value
.I val
may be one of
.IR debug ,
.IR info ,
.IR notice ,
.IR warn ,
.IR mark ,
.IR err ,
.IR crit ,
.IR alert ,
or
.IR none .
By default, everything equal to and above the threshold will be logged. 
The specifiers
.IR * , 
.IR ! , 
and
.I =
are interpreted as 'all', 'all but', and 'only', respectively (like
in the Linux version of syslogd(8)).
Time stamps have the priority 
.IR warn , 
system\-level errors have the priority
.IR err ,
and important start\-up messages the priority
.IR alert .
The signature key for the log file will never be logged to syslog or the
log file itself.
For failures to verify file integrity, error levels are defined
in the next section.
.br
.BI  PrintSeverity= val,
.br
.BI  LogSeverity= val,
.br
.BI  ExportSeverity= val,
.br
.BI  ExternalSeverity= val,
.br
.BI  PreludeSeverity= val,
.br
.BI  DatabaseSeverity= val,
and
.br
.BI  SyslogSeverity= val
set the thresholds for logging via stdout (or 
.IR /dev/console ), 
log file, TCP forwarding, calling external programs,
and 
.BR syslog (3).
.TP
.I "[EventSeverity]"
.BI  SeverityReadOnly= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityLogFiles= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityGrowingLogs= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityIgnoreNone= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityIgnoreAll= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityPrelink= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityUser0= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityUser1= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityUser2= val,
.br
.BI  SeverityUser3= val,
and
.br
.BI  SeverityUser4= val
define the error levels for failures to verify the integrity of
files/directories of the respective types. I.e. if such a file shows
unexpected modifications, an error of level
.I val
will be generated, and logged to all facilities with a threshold of at least
.IR val .
.br
.BI  SeverityFiles= val
sets the error level for file access problems, and 
.br
.BI  SeverityDirs= val 
for directory access problems.
.br
.BI SeverityNames= val
sets the error level for obscure file names 
(e.g. non\-printable characters), and for files
with invalid UIDs/GIDs.
.TP
.I "[External]"
.BI OpenCommand= path
Start the definition of an external logging program|script.
.br
.BI SetType= log|srv
Type/purpose of program (log for logging).
.br
.BI SetCommandline= list
Command line options.
.br
.BI SetEnviron= KEY=val
Environment for external program.
.br
.BI SetChecksum= val
Checksum of the external program (checked before invoking).
.br
.BI SetCredentials= username
User as who the program will run.
.br
.BI SetFilterNot= list
Words not allowed in message.
.br
.BI SetFilterAnd= list
Words required (ALL) in message.
.br
.BI SetFilterOr= list
Words required (at least one) in message.
.br
.BI SetDeadtime= seconds
Time between consecutive calls.
.TP
.I "[Utmp]"
Configuration for watching login/logout events.
.br
.BI LoginCheckActive= 0|1
Switch off/on login/logout reporting.
.br
.BI LoginCheckInterval= val
Interval (seconds) between checks for login/logout events.
.br
.BI SeverityLogin= val
.br
.BI SeverityLoginMulti= val
.br
.BI SeverityLogout= val
Severity levels for logins, multiple logins 
by same user, and logouts.
.TP
.I "[Kernel]"
Configuration for detecting kernel rootkits.
.br
.BI KernelCheckActive= 0|1
Switch off/on checking of kernel syscalls to detect kernel module rootkits.
.br
.BI KernelCheckInterval= val
Interval (seconds) between checks.
.br
.BI SeverityKernel= val
Severity level for clobbered kernel syscalls.
.br
.BI KernelCheckIDT= 0|1
Whether to check the interrrupt descriptor table.
.br
.BI KernelSystemCall= address
The address of system_call (grep system_call System.map). 
Required after a kernel update.
.br
.BI KernelProcRoot= address
The address of proc_root (grep ' proc_root$' System.map).
Required after a kernel update.
.br
.BI KernelProcRootIops= address 
The address of proc_root_inode_operations 
(grep proc_root_inode_operations System.map).
Required after a kernel update.
.br
.BI KernelProcRootLookup= address 
The address of proc_root_lookup (grep proc_root_lookup System.map).
Required after a kernel update.
.TP
.I "[SuidCheck]"
Settings for finding SUID/SGID files on disk.
.br
.BI SuidCheckActive= 0|1 
Switch off/on the check.
.br
.BI SuidCheckExclude= path
  A directory (and its subdirectories) 
  to exclude from the check. Only one directory can be specified this way. 
.br
.BI SuidCheckSchedule= schedule
Crontab-like schedule for checks. 
.br
.BI SeveritySuidCheck= severity 
Severity for events. 
.br
.BI SuidCheckFps= fps 
Limit files per seconds for SUID check. 
.br
.BI SuidCheckNosuid= 0|1 
Check filesystems mounted as nosuid. Defaults to not.
.br
.BI SuidCheckQuarantineFiles= 0|1 
Whether to quarantine files. Defaults to not.
.br
.BI SuidCheckQuarantineMethod= 0|1|2
Quarantine method. Delete = 1, remove suid/sgid flags = 1, move to quarantine directory = 2. Defaults to 1 (remove suid/sgid flags).
.br
.BI 
.TP
.I "[Mounts]"
Configuration for checking mounts.
.br
.BI MountCheckActive= 0|1
Switch off/on this module.
.br
.BI MountCheckInterval= seconds
  The interval between checks (default 300).
.br
.BI SeverityMountMissing= severity 
Severity for reports on missing mounts. 
.br
.BI SeverityOptionMissing= severity 
Severity for reports on missing mount options. 
.br
.BI CheckMount= path
[mount_options]
.br
Mount point to check. Mount options must be given as 
comma-separated list, separated by a blank from the preceding mount point.
.TP
.I "[UserFiles]"
Configuration for checking paths relative to user home directories.
.br
.BI UserFilesActive= 0|1
Switch off/on this module.
.br
.BI UserFilesName= filename 
policy
.br
Files to check for under each $HOME. Allowed values for 'policy'
are: allignore, attributes, logfiles, loggrow, noignore (default), 
readonly, user0, user1, user2, user3, and user4.
.br
.BI UserFilesCheckUids= uid_list
A list of UIDs where we want to check. The default
is all. Ranges (e.g. 100-500) are allowed. If there is an open range (e.g.
1000-), it must be last in the list.
.TP
.I "[ProcessCheck]"
Settings for finding hidden/fake,required processes on the local host.
.br
.BI ProcessCheckActive= 0|1 
Switch off/on the check.
.br
.BI ProcessCheckInterval= seconds
  The interval between checks (default 300).
.br
.BI SeverityProcessCheck= severity 
Severity for events (default crit). 
.br
.BI ProcessCheckMinPID= pid
The minimum PID to check (default 0).
.br
.BI ProcessCheckMaxPID= pid
The maximum PID to check (default 32767).
.br
.BI ProcessCheckPSPath= path 
The path to ps (autodetected at compile time).
.br
.BI ProcessCheckPSArg= argument 
The argument to ps (autodetected at compile time).
Must yield PID in first column.
.br
.BI ProcessCheckExists= regular_expression
Check for existence of a process matching the given regular expression.
.TP
.I "[PortCheck]"
Settings for checking open ports on the local host.
.br
.BI PortCheckActive= 0|1 
Switch off/on the check.
.br
.BI PortCheckInterval= seconds
  The interval between checks (default 300).
.br
.BI PortCheckUDP= yes|no
Whether to check UPD ports as well (default yes). 
.br
.BI SeverityPortCheck= severity 
Severity for events (default crit). 
.br
.BI PortCheckInterface= ip_address 
Additional interface to check.
.br
.BI PortCheckOptional= ip_address:list 
Ports that may, but need not be open. The ip_address is the one
of the interface, the list must be
comma or whitespace separated, each item must be (port|service)/protocol,
e.g. 22/tcp,nfs/tcp/nfs/udp.
.br
.BI PortCheckRequired= ip_address:list 
Ports that are required to be open. The ip_address is the one
of the interface, the list must be
comma or whitespace separated, each item must be (port|service)/protocol,
e.g. 22/tcp,nfs/tcp/nfs/udp.
.TP
.I "[Database]"
Settings for 
.I logging 
to a database.
.br
.BI SetDBHost= db_host
Host where the DB server runs (default: localhost). 
Should be a numeric IP address for PostgreSQL.
.br
.BI SetDBName= db_name
Name of the database (default: samhain).
.br
.BI SetDBTable= db_table
Name of the database table (default: log).
.br
.BI SetDBUser= db_user 
Connect as this user (default: samhain).
.br
.BI SetDBPassword= db_password
Use this password (default: none).
.br
.BI SetDBServerTstamp= true|false 
Log server timestamp for client messages (default: true).
.br
.BI UsePersistent= true|false
Use a persistent connection (default: true).
.TP
.I "[Misc]"
.BI Daemon= no|yes
Detach from controlling terminal to become a daemon.
.br
.BI  MessageHeader= format
Costom format for message header. Replacements:
.I %F 
source file name,
.I %L 
source file line,
.I %S 
severity,
.I %T
timestamp,
.I %C
message class.
.br
.BI VersionString= string 
Set version string to include in file signature database 
(along with hostname and date).
.br
.BI SetReverseLookup= true|false
If false, skip reverse lookups when connecting to a host known by name
rather than IP address.
.br
.BI  HideSetup= yes|no
Don't log name of config/database files on startup.
.br
.BI  SyslogFacility= facility
Set the syslog facility to use. Default is LOG_AUTHPRIV.
.br
.BI MACType= HASH-TIGER|HMAC-TIGER
Set type of message authentication code (HMAC). 
Must be identical on client and server. 
.br
.BI SetLoopTime= val
Defines the interval (in seconds) for timestamps.
.br
.BI SetConsole= device
Set the console device (default /dev/console).
.br
.BI MessageQueueActive= 1|0
Whether to use a SysV IPC message queue.
.br
.BI PreludeMapToInfo= list of severities
The severities (see section 
.IR [Log] )
that should be mapped to impact
severity 
.I info
in prelude.
.br
.BI PreludeMapToLow= list of severities
The severities (see section 
.IR [Log] )
that should be mapped to impact
severity 
.I low
in prelude.
.br
.BI PreludeMapToMedium= list of severities
The severities (see section 
.IR [Log] )
that should be mapped to impact
severity 
.I medium
in prelude.
.br
.BI PreludeMapToHigh= list of severities
The severities (see section 
.IR [Log] )
that should be mapped to impact
severity 
.I high
in prelude.
.br
.BI SetMailTime= val
defines the maximum interval (in seconds) between succesive e\-mail reports.
Mail might be empty if there are no events to report.
.br
.BI SetMailNum= val
defines the maximum number of messages that are stored before e\-mailing them.
Messages of highest priority are always sent immediately.
.br
.BI SetMailAddress= username @ host
sets the recipient address for mailing. 
.I "No aliases should be used."
For security, you should prefer a numerical host address.
.br
.BI SetMailRelay= server
sets the hostname for the mail relay server (if you need one).
If no relay server is given, mail is sent directly to the host given in the
mail address, otherwise it is sent to the relay server, who should
forward it to the given address.
.br
.BI SetMailSubject= val
defines a custom format for the subject of an email message.
.br
.BI SetMailSender= val
defines the sender for the 'From:' field of a message.
.br
.BI SetMailFilterAnd= list
defines a list of strings all of which must match a message, otherwise
it will not be mailed.
.br
.BI SetMailFilterOr= list
defines a list of strings at least one of which must match a message, otherwise
it will not be mailed.
.br
.BI SetMailFilterNot= list
defines a list of strings none of which should match a message, otherwise
it will not be mailed.
.br
.BI SamhainPath= /path/to/binary
sets the path to the samhain binary. If set, samhain will checksum
its own binary both on startup and termination, and compare both.
.br
.BI SetBindAddress= IP_address
The IP address (i.e. interface on multi-interface box) to use
for outgoing connections. 
.br
.BI SetTimeServer= server
sets the hostname for the time server. 
.br
.BI TrustedUser= name|uid
Add a user to the set of trusted users (root and the effective user
are always trusted. You can add up to 7 more users).
.br
.BI SetLogfilePath= AUTO|/path 
Path to logfile (AUTO to tack hostname on compiled-in path). 
.br
.BI SetLockfilePath= AUTO|/path 
Path to lockfile (AUTO to tack hostname on compiled-in path). 
.TP
.B Standalone or client only
.br
.BI SetNiceLevel= -19..19
Set scheduling priority during file check.
.br
.BI SetIOLimit= bps 
Set IO limits (kilobytes per second) for file check.
.br
.BI SetFilecheckTime= val
Defines the interval (in seconds) between succesive file checks.
.br
.BI FileCheckScheduleOne= schedule
Crontab-like schedule for file checks. If used, 
.I SetFilecheckTime
is ignored.
.br
.BI UseHardlinkCheck= yes|no 
Compare number of hardlinks to number of subdirectories for directories.
.br
.BI HardlinkOffset= N:/path 
Exception (use multiple times for multiple 
exceptions). N is offset (actual - expected hardlinks) for /path.
.br
.BI AddOKChars= N1,N2,..
List of additional acceptable characters (byte value(s)) for the check for 
weird filenames. Nn may be hex (leading '0x': 0xNN), octal 
(leading zero: 0NNN), or decimal.
Use 
.I all
for all.
.br
.BI FilenamesAreUTF8= yes|no
Whether filenames are UTF-8 encoded (defaults to no). If yes, filenames
are checked for invalid UTF-8 encoding and for ending in invisible characters.
.br
.BI IgnoreAdded= path_regex
Ignore if this file/directory is added/created. 
.br
.BI IgnoreMissing= path_regex
Ignore if this file/directory is missing/deleted. 
.br
.BI ReportOnlyOnce= yes|no
Report only once on a modified file (default yes).
.br
.BI  ReportFullDetail= yes|no
Report in full detail on modified files (not only modified items).
.br
.BI UseLocalTime= yes|no
Report file timestamps in local time rather than GMT (default no).
Do not use this with Beltane. 
.br
.BI  ChecksumTest= {init|update|check|none}
defines whether to initialize/update the database or verify files against it.
If 'none', you should supply the required option on the command line.
.br
.BI SetPrelinkPath= path
Path of the prelink executable (default /usr/sbin/prelink).
.br
.BI SetPrelinkChecksum= checksum
TIGER192 checksum of the prelink executable (no default).
.br
.BI SetLogServer= server
sets the hostname for the log server. 
.br
.BI SetServerPort= portnumber
sets the port on the server to connect to. 
.br
.BI SetDatabasePath= AUTO|/path 
Path to database (AUTO to tack hostname on compiled-in path). 
.br
.BI DigestAlgo= SHA1|MD5
Use SHA1 or MD5 instead of the TIGER checksum (default: TIGER192).
.br
.BI RedefReadOnly= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the ReadOnly policy.
Tests are: CHK (checksum), TXT (store literal content), LNK (link), 
HLN (hardlink), INO (inode), USR (user), GRP (group), MTM (mtime),
ATM (atime), CTM (ctime), SIZ (size), RDEV (device numbers) 
and/or MOD (file mode).
.br
.BI RedefAttributes= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the Attributes policy.
.br
.BI RedefLogFiles= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the LogFiles policy.
.br
.BI RedefGrowingLogFiles= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the GrowingLogFiles policy.
.br
.BI RedefIgnoreAll= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the IgnoreAll policy.
.br
.BI RedefIgnoreNone= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the IgnoreNone policy.
.br
.BI RedefUser0= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the User0 policy.
.br
.BI RedefUser1= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the User1 policy.
.br
.BI RedefUser2= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the User2 policy.
.br
.BI RedefUser3= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the User3 policy.
.br
.BI RedefUser4= +/-XXX,+/-YYY,...
Add or subtract tests XXX from the User4 policy.
.TP
.B Server Only
.br
.BI SetUseSocket= yes|no
If unset, do not open the command socket. The default is no.
.br
.BI SetSocketAllowUid= UID 
Which user can connect to the command socket. The default is 0 (root). 
.br
.BI SetSocketPassword= password 
Password (max. 14 chars, no '@') for password-based authentication on the
command socket (only if the OS does not support passing 
credentials via sockets).
.br
.BI SetChrootDir= path
If set, chroot to this directory after startup.
.br
.BI SetStripDomain= yes|no 
Whether to strip the domain from the client hostname when 
logging client messages (default: yes).
.br
.BI SetClientFromAccept= true|false
If true, use client address as known to the communication layer. Else
(default) use client name as claimed by the client, try to verify against
the address known to the communication layer, and accept 
(with a warning message) even if this fails.
.br
.BI  UseClientSeverity= yes|no
Use the severity of client messages.
.br
.BI  UseClientClass= yes|no
Use the class of client messages.
.br
.BI SetServerPort= number
The port that the server should use for listening (default is 49777).
.br
.BI SetServerInterface= IPaddress
The IP address (i.e. interface on multi-interface box) that the
server should use for listening (default is all). Use INADDR_ANY to reset
to all. 
.br
.BI  SeverityLookup= severity
Severity of the message on client address != socket peer.
.br
.BI UseSeparateLogs= true|false
If true, messages from different clients will be logged to separate
log files (the name of the client will be appended to the name of the main
log file to construct the logfile name).
.br
.BI  SetClientTimeLimit= seconds
The maximum time between client messages. If exceeded, a warning will 
be issued (the default is 86400 sec = 1 day).
.br
.BI SetUDPActive= yes|no
yule 1.2.8+: Also listen on 514/udp (syslog). 


.TP
.I "[Clients]"
This section is only relevant if 
.B samhain
is run as a log server for clients running on another (or the same) machine.
.br
.BI Client= hostname @ salt @ verifier 
registers a client at host 
.I hostname
(fully qualified hostname required) for access to the
log server. 
Log entries from unregistered clients will not be accepted.
To generate a salt and a valid verifier, use the command
.B "samhain -P"
.IR "password" ,
where
.I password
is the password of the client. A simple utility program 
.B samhain_setpwd
is provided to re\-set the compiled\-in default password of the client
executable to a user\-defined
value. 
.TP
.I "[EOF]"
An optional end marker. Everything below is ignored.

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.BR samhain (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Rainer Wichmann (http://la\-samhna.de)

.SH BUG REPORTS
.PP
If you find a bug in
.BR samhain ,
please send electronic mail to
.IR support@la\-samhna.de .
Please include your operating system and its revision, the version of
.BR samhain ,
what C compiler you used to compile it, your 'configure' options, and
anything else you deem helpful.

.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
.PP
Copyright (\(co) 2000, 2004, 2005 Rainer Wichmann
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

